---
title: Bus Error
author: brian
layout: post
date: 2008-04-17T00:53:00+00:00
url: /2008/04/bus-error/
blogger_blog:
  - ridiculouslycircuitous.blogspot.com
blogger_author:
  - Brian
blogger_permalink:
  - /2008/04/bus-error.html
categories:
  - My Ridiculously Circuitous Plan

---
<span>It&#8217;s a good thing that Pittsburgh&#8217;s hockey team is better than its public transit system, because otherwise I&#8217;d be in a mood.</span>

<div>
  <span><br /></span>
</div>

<div>
  <span>Things I won&#8217;t miss about the <a href="http://www.portauthority.org/paac/">Port Authority</a>:</span>
</div>

<div>
  <ul>
    <li>
      <span><span>Bus trunking</span>. I don&#8217;t know if this is what this is actually called, but if you have, say, three different routes to the suburbs that share the same route through the city, each with a thirty-minute frequency, you can schedule them in a couple of different ways. The smart way would be to stagger arrivals, thereby providing a ten-minute service frequency through the common routing area (i.e., the city, which is the bit of the route that actually has the density required to support public transit). The not-smart way would be to have three buses come along one minute after each other (or, better yet, following each other), thereby providing a thirty-minute service. Ten-minute service is almost frequent enough to be dependable even without precise timing. Thirty-minute service is not. Guess which one the Port Authority uses?</span>
    </li>
    <li>
      <span><span>Bus packing</span>. Yeah, thirty minute service. I suspect they do this because, at least on the 61 routes through the southern bit of the East End, they don&#8217;t have enough space on the buses for all the people (largely students and staff at the Oakland universities; people like me) who want to ride them, so frequently a full bus will pass you. Then another full bus will pass you. Hopefully a third full bus won&#8217;t pass you, because then you&#8217;re waiting thirty minutes for another full bus. You are, anyway. I&#8217;m not. I&#8217;m walking.</span>
    </li>
    <li>
      <span><span>That one driver on the 67H who doesn&#8217;t know where the Schenley Pool stop is and for some reason wants to fight me about it.</span> I should not have a blogworthy feud with a bus driver. And yet I do.</span>
    </li>
  </ul>
  
  <p>
    <span>Anyway, a lot of this is not really the Port Authority&#8217;s fault. They don&#8217;t have any money, because they are an American public transit authority, and we pretty much decided public transit was for <a href="http://www.theonion.com/content/node/38644">other people</a> half a century ago. Mind you, this not having any money doesn&#8217;t keep them from digging a <a href="http://www.theboretotheshore.com/">half-billion dollar tunnel</a> under the Allegheny River to carry the <a href="http://www.portauthority.org/PAAC/CustomerInfo/BuswaysandT/LightRailTransitSystem/TQuickFacts/tabid/187/Default.aspx">seventeenth-largest</a> light rail system in the United States the distance of a fifteen minute walk. But it does serve Heinz Field, and this town loses its senses when it comes to da Stillers, so this is two rants for a later date, and one argument I&#8217;ll lose by fiat. Moving on.</span></div>