---
title: Live, via Internet, from the hammock
date: 2017-03-28T15:00:00
draft: false
image: ietf98-hammock.jpg
tags:
  - Geekery
math: false
---

Internet architecture and Internet-centered research being a global enterprise,
I spend between four and seven weeks a year on the road, depending on which
year, your definition of road and your definition of week, and a fair amount of
time in teleconferences in various timezones in the time in between. One of the
fixtures in my calendar is the thrice-annual meeting of the [Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF)](https://www.ietf.org), taking place right now in
Chicago. I've only missed three such meetings in the past dozen years, and each
time I do I attempt to take part via Internet as best I can. Here are my
reflections about well it's working this time around, how it's improved, and how
it could improve further. For in a world where those who steadfastly believe in
borders and walls seem to be gaining the upper hand, it seems prudent to prepare
to do the work of Internet architecture, engineering, and standardization
without the benefit of free movement of the people doing it.

<!--more-->

First, the technical: I've been using [MeetEcho](https://www.meetecho.com) to
attend the working group sessions, and a combination of a Revolve Robotics
[Kubi](https://www.revolverobotics.com) foe video and Cisco's
[Webex](http://www.webex.com) for audio, bridged to whatever early-aughts era
teleconferencing phone it's plugged into, for the IAB sessions. I've been doing
this on a few-years-old Macbook Pro (because I've been a fanboi since I got my 
[Apple IIgs](https://en.wikipedia.org/Apple_IIGS) in '87) and a newish Linux box
(to see how well it works).

![three working groups at once](/img/ietf98-meetecho.jpg)

The good: Meetecho Just Works on
[Firefox](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/new/) on Mac and Linux. a
testament to the hard work of the Meetecho crew on site, the engineering of the
product, and the [WebRTC](https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/rtcweb/) technology
it's based on. It even Just Works if you're running three meeting streams at once, presuming your Internet connection can handle it.

The bad: Webex on Linux is a 
[screaming nightmare](http://blog.michelemattioni.me/2016/02/09/how-to-get-webex-running-on-an-ubuntu-smoothly/),
because Java, so I gave up and have been running the Kubi stream either on Linux
or one Firefox tab on the Mac, and the Webex app on the Mac regardless. All of
the standard complaints about conference-room phones placed ad-hoc in biggish
conference rooms apply as well.

The Kubi is cute, in that it lets you point an iPad around the room so you can
"look" at who's talking, and everyone in the room has a point of reference for
"where Brian is", but the controls are not great for swinging around the room
quickly, and I've spent a bit too much time feeling uncomfortably close to
whoever happens to be sitting next to the thing. I'm not sure whether this is an
execution thing, or just a fundamental problem with
telepresence-via-iPad-on-a-stick, but I'm not sure it's a significant
improvement from a laptop in a corner or the Voice from the Heavens, for the
remote participant at least.

![live via hammock](/img/ietf98-kubi.jpg)

None of the technology fixes the fundamental problem of timezones, though, and
attending a meeting in Chicago from ZÃ¼rich kind of destroys the evenings, and
while I can nudge my clock toward Central Daylight Time, my family doesn't.
Having jet lag at home is a little weird. Dinner last night had a distinct F1
pit-stop feeling to it, as I raced through it in a few-mintes break between two
meetings<sup>1</sup>. 

And as for that Experience: Attending via Meetecho from the comfort of your own
home and hammock is *vastly* superior to having to run between rooms in a
conference center in order to wedge yourself into the Standard Issue Hotel
Conference Center Chair. For actually tracking what's going on in the meetings,
and even for interactive discussion at the mic via the remote queue, it's
basically as good as being there, especially in standing-room only rooms. The
audio is usually good, the seating is way more comfortable, and there's no need
to complain about the temperature<sup>2</sup>. The experience this time was
smooth enough that I would even consider remote charing via MeetEcho, should I
need to miss another meeting.

But the important part of the IETF, for me, isn't the working group meetings:
the serendipitous meetings in the hallway between them are generally more
productive<sup>3</sup> than the working group meetings themselves, the informal
time is important to catch up with colleagues and friends I see only three times
a year, and the frantic energy of the place is missing on my balcony. Until we
find a way to replace that, a post-airline IETF remains firmly in the future.

- - - 

<sup>1</sup> On further thought, this does kind of feel like the afternoon cookie
scrum at the IETF, so I guess it's part of the Experience.

<sup>2</sup> Unless, of course, you live in an unheated / uncooled house in a
region where heating/cooling is necessary, but that's hardly the IETF's fault.

<sup>3</sup> In the sense that they lead to more interesting work, which
admittedly may not be the lowest-stress definition of "productive".