---
title: A little optimism about Swiss politics
date: 2018-03-04T21:00:00
draft: false
tags:
  - Nonfiction
math: false
---

I don't think I've _ever_ written a completely optimisic post about politics,
but today seems as good a day as any to try. Today was an _Abstimmungssonntag_
("referendum Sunday") here, and the most important question before Switzerland
at the national level was a revocation of the federal government's authority
to levy a compulsory television and radio fee: NoBillag. I've [already
written](/post/2018-01-17-on-billag) about this referendum, and how it represented
not a mere return of four hundred francs per year to every household, not a
mere privatization of a few television and radio stations (one of which I'm
listening to [right now](http://www.radioswissjazz.ch/en)), but a frontal
assault on public media and an attempt to drive the country's media landscape
into low-information territory; in other words _noch ein Schritt zum
kriechenden Beitritt der Schweiz in die vereinigten Staaten_<sup>(1)</sup>.

That's not going to happen, at least not today. 71% of Swiss voters, myself
included, said no to this one. While the polling had tended in this direction
for a while, this was a far more decisive result than anyone was expecting,
and -- here's where I get optimistic -- I think this might mean something
about Switzerland's struggle with its inner fascism.

The Swiss People's Party (_Schweizerischer Volkspartei_, SVP) is usually
described in the English-language media as "far-right", back before
"far-right" was the scary new thing in Europe. I've described them in the past
as [vandalist](/2014/02/on-vandalist-politics); now "Swiss Trumpist" is a
useful if not entirely accurate abbreviation for an American
audience<sup>(2)</sup>. The primary unifying theme of SVP politics as long as
I've been here has been unrelenting
[hostility](/2011/02/the-problem-with-the-peoples-party/) to people who are
not Swiss, with a relatively restrictive understanding of the term "Swiss". 

One particular piece of this hostility was the _Ausschaffungsinitiative_
("Deportation Initiative"), which foresaw automatic loss of right to remain
and subsequent deportation in case a noncitizen was convicted in Switzerland
of murder, rape or other sexual assault, robbery, human trafficking, drug
dealing, breaking and entering; or when said noncitizen abused social
insurance (AHV/IV, "Social Security" in American English) or social assistance
(the part of the social safety net that comes under "Welfare"), curiously,
whether convicted thereof or not. The theory here was that since foreigners
commit all the crime and steal all the welfare (which, actually, they don't),
if we just kick them out then there won't be any more crime or welfare fraud.

The initiative passed in November 2010, 53-47. There were of course the usual
problems with law by vandalism, such that nobody can be convicted of breaking
and entering because no such particular offense exists in Swiss criminal law.
There was also the matter that the complex set of treaties governing
Switzerland's relationship with the EU already regulated when EU citizens
could be deported from Switzerland. There was the further matter that the
automatic deportation foreseen by the initiative was fundamentally
incompatible with the role of the judiciary in a state subscribing to the rule
of law. Parilament duly implemented the initiative without all these
unimplementable bits, which the SVP saw as a violation of the rights of the
people (in this case, their base, plus the fifteen additional percent of the
population they'd scared into voting for the _Ausschaffungsinitiative_ by
waving [posters of Ivan S.](/2011/02/the-problem-with-the-peoples-party/) at
them) to self-determination through the initiative process<sup>(3)</sup>.

The SVP's response to this was the _Durchsetzungsinitiative_ "Implementation
Initiative", which would have directly added text to Article 197<sup>(4)</sup>
of the Constitution stating exactly which sections of the criminal code
counted toward deportation, further stating that the power of deportation was
retroactive for ten years, further explicitly ignoring the bilateral
agreements on the status of EU citizens, and further allowing exceptions only
in cases of self defense. tl;dr: "we fucking mean it, throw out the fucking
foreign criminals, right fucking now."

All right, here comes the optimism:

In contrast to the 52% Yes from the former intitiative, this one failed, a
little over two years ago, with 60% No. This is somewhat unprecedented:
Switzerland is famously conservative. Eight percent of the population doesn't
usually change its mind in the space of five years. It failed because it --
finally -- went too far. It was arbitrary, as the set of deportable laws and
retroactivity clause meant that someone who had a single relatively minor
crime in their youth could be deported a decade later, this itself being again
a product of the medocrity of law by vandalism. It was incompatible with the
rule of law, first by replacing the Parliament's function in implementing
provisions of the Constution by (poorly) writing exactly the law they wanted
right in Article 197, second in removing the ability of the judiciary to do
any actual judging, third by ignoring and thereby endangering the Bilateral
treaties<sup>(5)</sup> with the EU, which a majority of Swiss people still
think are a pretty good deal, on balance. It was protofascist, a point
[memorably](https://www.tagesanzeiger.ch/zuerich/stadt/anzeigetafeln-am-zuercher-hb-zeigen-hakenkreuz/story/27648296)
made by an anti-initiative ad turning the Swiss cross into a swastika, to hit
people over the head with the parallel to "two-class justice" as practiced in
Nazi Germany. 

Swiss politics from the center-right to the hard left breathed a sigh of
relief when the _Durchsetzungsinitiative_ failed. We're still hearing the echo
of that relief with the decisive No on NoBillag. Though the initiative's
proponents come from the youth wing of the Free Democratic Party, the politics
are out of the SVP playbook: a frontal assault on the intitutions of the state
and the political center, hastily written and ultimately mediocre text that
has no place in the Constitution. I believe that we, the people of
Switzerland, or at least the majority who dwell closer to the center of the
political landscape, are learning to recognize these plays for what they are,
and to reject them for the
[danger](/2011/03/amerikanische-qualitat)<sup>1</sup> they represent.

- - -

<sup>(1)</sup>"The creeping admittance of Switzerland to the United States."
The SVP, in particular, _hates_ the EU, and the idea that Switzerland might
have one day joined it, and fights against anything that smells like getting
closer to it ("...creeping accession..."). I could be generous here and say
that this has something to do with a deep and abiding commitment to the idea
of national sovereignty -- whatever that really means for a state without
economic or cultural dominance of its environs and/or a blue-water navy in the
21st century -- but I think it has more to do with a (correct) fear that,
subjugated to a larger political order, the SVP would disappear as a very
mediocre fish in a very large pond. I digress.

<sup>(2)</sup>Indeed, "vandalist" is a pretty good description of Trumpism for
someone who's never seen The Apprentice, has no Twitter account, and has
pointedly ignored English-language news for the past two years.

<sup>(3)</sup>This is the same pattern followed with the [equally
unimplementable](/2014/02/insel-schweiz) _Masseneinwanderungsinitiative_, the
blowback from which will arrive in 2018, but this is the _optimistic_ post,
remember?

<sup>(4)</sup>Everything temporary in the Swiss constitution happens in
Article 197. This generally involves things like delays in the effect of other
articles added or changed, and how to handle certain details during the
implementation of an initiative.

<sup>(5)</sup>Ignoring and thereby endangering the Bilateral can either be
seen as an avocation of the SVP, or as the entire strategy thereof; see
<sup>(1)</sup>.