---
title: On Billag
date: 2018-01-15T19:00:00
draft: true
tags:
  - Nonfiction
math: false
---

My opinion on Billag<sup>1</sup> is complicated. 

I've long failed to see, in a media environment in which radio and television
ownership no longer correlate with public media consumption (and, indeed, in
which the benefits of the information service provided by said public media
accrue even to those who don't consume it), why we need 230 semi-polite,
semi-privatized bureaucrats to spot-enforce a regressive tax. We could shut
Billag down in a revenue-neutral way fairly simply, if we wanted to. Setting a
budget per head for public and regional media and appointing a commission to
evaluate renewable applications for funding (something like SERI) would take
care of the depoliticization of media funding Billag is supposed to achieve,
and paying for SRF and regional media out of the federal general fund would
fix the regressiveness.

The NoBillag initiative before the Swiss people in March, however, is
simultaneously far less well thought out and far more sinister than that. It
is, in essence, a frontal assault on media independence disguised either (in
the eyes of its JFS supporters) as a market reform, or (in the eyes of its
JSVP supporters) a 350 franc-a-year rebate for a television channel that makes
their mother party look bad too often.

I'm voting No, and you should too, if you have the right. A Switzerland with
this initiative's text added to its constitution will be a Switzerland without
public media. While a Switzerland without public media will, indeed, still be
Switzerland on the day after SRF shuts down, America's experience with
political media privatization to date calls into grave question the ability of
a multiparty democracy to survive in the long term without some consensus as
to what the truth is, and independent political news in the form of public
media with a legal duty to provide information as a public service goes a long
way toward keeping that consensus from decaying.

tl;dr hey Switzerland, you want Bundesrat Trump? 'Cause NoBillag is how you
get Bundesrat Trump.

<!-- more -->

Like, I suspect, most Americans who have a smartphone, I spent way more time
in 2017 rage-refreshing Twitter to catch up on the ongoing collapse of the
institution of the Presidency of the United States than is probably healthy.
I'm going to do less of that sort of thing this year: no amount of my
attention from here in Wallisellen will change the fact that American
democracy, in its present form, is a complete write-off, and will need to be
rebuilt from the grassroots up with a revised political culture. I'm
not optimistic that significant progress will be made here during my lifetime.

That political culture itself, though, is exportable, and remains a danger for
any nation with politicians who seek power and can comprehend enough English
to read and understand its propaganda. And the dominant event that amplified
the least responsible voices of that political culture was the 1987 repeal of
the Federal Communications Commission's [Fairness
Doctrine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fairness_Doctrine). It would only be a
minor overstatement to say that when the Reagan-and-Nixon appointed Commission
repealed the doctrine, their decision itself based on the First Amendment, it
was only a matter of time before a populist television star backed by a
right-wing noise machine on the fringes of the Republican Party became
President.

- - -
<sup>1</sup>: For my non-Swiss readers who wonder what the hell I'm talking
about: Switzerland has a compulsory radio and television licensing that works
out to about 350CHF a year per household, for which, confusingly, you don't
even really need a radio or a television to be liable for. What this means is
that, instead of an annoying pledge drive every so often on your public radio
station, once a decade you get a guy ringing your doorbell at nine in the
morning to ask why you haven't paid, and when you explain that you're in the
same household with your wife, who forgot to change her name after marriage in
her licensing record (which, indeed, is at the same address, which can be
verified by reading her madien name, which is on the door, right next to
yours), he asks you (only as politely and apologetically as required by law)
whether she's divorced you yet. On reflection, in terms of net mean annoyance
over time, it's probably better than the pledge drive. And yet...